# Using the Bash++ compiler

# Basic usage

`bpp [options] [file] ...`

```bash
$ bpp src.bpp            # Compile & immediately run the program
$ bpp -o out.sh src.bpp  # Compile & save the program to out.sh
$ bpp -o - src.bpp       # Compile & print the program to stdout
$ cat src.bpp | bpp      # Pipe command output to the compiler
$ bpp -h # Display help
$ bpp -v # Display version
```

If no input file is specified, the compiler will read from stdin.

Arguments after the input file are passed to the compiled program.

# Options

###### `-o <file>`, `--output <file>`

Specify the output file for the compiled program.

If the output file is `-`, the program will be printed to stdout.

If the output file is not specified, the program will be executed immediately after compilation.

###### `-b <version>`, `--target-bash <version>`

Specify the target Bash version for the compiled program.

The default is Bash 5.2. This affects how the program is compiled, but does not change Bash++ syntax.

###### `-I <path>`, `--include <path>`

Add a directory to the include paths.

Files in the include paths can be included with `@include <file>`.

Include paths are searched in the order they are given.

The *last* include path is always `/usr/lib/bpp/stdlib`.

###### `-W <warning>`, `--warn <warning>`

Enable or disable the given warning. If the warning is prefixed with `no-`, it will be disabled. Otherwise, it will be enabled.

 - `-Wall`: Enable all warnings.
 - `-Wnone`: Disable all warnings.

See below for a list of available warnings.

###### `-t`, `--tokens`

Display the tokens generated by the lexer (do not compile).

###### `-p`, `--parse-tree`

Display the parse tree generated by the parser (do not compile).

###### `-e`, `--entity-tree`
Display the entity tree generated by the compiler (do not compile).

###### `-h`, `--help`

Display help information.

###### `-v`, `--version`

Display the version of the Bash++ compiler.

# Include Paths

When an include directive is given with angle-brackets (as in `@include <file>`), the compiler will search for the file in the include paths. The last include path is always `/usr/lib/bpp/stdlib`, which contains the Bash++ standard library. The include paths are searched in the order they are given.

# Warnings

Here is a list of specific warning flags that can be enabled with `-W` or disabled with `-Wno-`:

 - *bash53-native-supershell*
   - Description: Use of Bash 5.3's native supershell implementation `${ command; }` instead of Bash++'s form `@(command)`
   - Rationale: Bash 5.3's native supershell implementation is not backwards-compatible with Bash 5.2 and earlier
   - Enabled by default: Yes
 - *cast-to-unknown-class*
   - Description: The target class of a dynamic cast is not known at compile-time
   - Rationale: This is probably a typo in the target class name
   - Enabled by default: Yes
 - *implicit-toprimitive*
   - Description: Implicit `.toPrimitive` call by referencing a non-primitive object in a primitive context
   - Rationale: This is part of the design of Bash++, but some users may want to enable this warning to catch potential mistakes in their code
   - Enabled by default: No
 - *cast-from-implicit-toprimitive*
   - Description: Attempting to `@dynamic_cast<T> @obj` instead of `@dynamic_cast<T> &@obj`
   - Rationale: This is equivalent to `@dynamic_cast<T> @obj.toPrimitive`. It is more likely that the user intended to take the address of `@obj` than the output of its `toPrimitive` method.
   - Enabled by default: Yes
 - *cast-to-implicit-toprimitive*
   - Description: Attempting to `@dynamic_cast<@obj> "input"` instead of `@dynamic_cast<T> "input"`
   - Rationale: This is equivalent to `@dynamic_cast<@obj.toPrimitive> "input"`. The user may be under the mistaken impression that this would cast `"input"` to the type of `@obj`. In fact, it will attempt to interpret the output of `@obj.toPrimitive` as a class name.
   - Enabled by default: Yes
 - *typeof-implicit-toprimitive*
   - Description: Attempting to take `@typeof @obj` instead of `@typeof &@obj`
   - Rationale: This is equivalent to `@typeof @obj.toPrimitive`. It is more likely that the user intended to take the address of `@obj` than the output of its `toPrimitive` method.
   - Enabled by default: Yes
